GATE 2027 IIT Madras  | Organizing Institute 
 
CS 
 
Computer Science and Information Technology 
 
 
Section 1: Engineering Mathematics 
Discrete Mathematics: Propositional and first order logic. Sets, relations, functions, partial orders and 
lattices. Monoids, Groups. Graphs: connectivity, matching, colouring. Combinatorics: counting, recurrence 
relations, generating functions. 
 
Linear Algebra: Matrices, determinants, system of linear equations, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, LU 
decomposition. 
 
Calculus: Limits, continuity and differentiability, Maxima and minima, Mean value theorem, Integration. 
 
Probability and Statistics: Random variables, Uniform, normal, exponential, Poisson and binomial 
distributions. Mean, median, mode and standard deviation. Conditional probability and Bayes theorem. 
 
Section 2: Digital Logic 
Boolean algebra and minimization – algebraic technique, Karnaugh map, tabular method. Design of 
combinational and sequential circuits. Number representation and arithmetic (fixed and floating point). 
 
Section 3: Computer Organization and Architecture 
Instruction set and  addressing modes. Design of arithmetic and logic unit (ALU). Design of control unit – 
hardwired and microprogrammed. Memory interfacing and hierarchy: performance, cache memory mapping. 
I/O interface (interrupt and DMA). Instruction pipelining, pipeline hazards. 
 
Section 4: Programming and Data Structures 
Programming in C. Recursion. Arrays, stacks, queues, linked lists, trees, binary search trees, binary heaps, 
graphs. 
 
Section 5: Algorithms 
Searching, sorting, hashing. Asymptotic worst case time and space complexity. Algorithm design techniques: 
greedy, dynamic programming and divide‐and‐conquer. Graph traversals, minimum spanning trees, shortest 
paths. 
 
Section 6: Theory of Computation 
Regular expressions and finite automata. Context-free grammars and push-down automata. Regular and 
context-free languages, pumping lemma. Turing machines and undecidability. 
 
Section 7: Compiler Design 
Lexical analysis, parsing, syntax-directed translation. Runtime environments. Intermediate code generation. 
Local optimisation, Data flow analyses: constant propagation, liveness analysis, common sub expression 
elimination. 
 
Section 8: Operating System 
System  calls,  processes,  threads,  inter‐process  communication,  concurrency  and  synchronization. 
Deadlock. CPU and I/O scheduling. Memory management and virtual memory. File systems. 
GATE 2027 IIT Madras  | Organizing Institute 
 
Section 9: Databases 
ER‐model. Relational model: relational algebra, tuple calculus, SQL. Integrity constraints, normal forms. File 
organization, indexing (e.g., B and B+ trees). Transactions and concurrency control. 
 
Section 10: Computer Networks 
Principles of Layering; Basics of switching (circuit, packet and virtual circuit) and performance metrics;  
 
Data link layer: error detection, Medium Access Control, Ethernet; Distance vector and link state routing;   
IPv4 - Fragmentation, CIDR Notation, Network Address Translation; TCP- flow control and congestion 
control, socket API; DNS and HTTP. 
 
 